---
comments: true
---

# Tutorial for Text to Speech Vocoder

## I. Overview
The speech synthesis vocoder is a key component of speech synthesis technology. It utilizes signal processing algorithms to convert spectral parameters generated by acoustic models into playable waveform audio, while supporting adjustments of audio characteristics such as timbre and pitch. It is primarily applied in backend processing of speech synthesis systems, audio effect optimization, and personalized voice generation.

## II. Supported Model List

### Fastspeech Model
<table>
  <tr>
    <th >Model</th>
    <th >Download link</th>
    <th >Training Data</th>
    <th>Model Storage Size (MB)</th>
    <th >Introduction</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>pwgan_csmsc</td>
    <td><a href="https://paddle-model-ecology.bj.bcebos.com/paddlex/official_inference_model/paddle3.0rc0/pwgan_csmsc.tar">pwgan_csmsc</a></td>
    <td>\</td>
    <td>5.1M</td>
    <td rowspan="1">Parallel WaveGAN (PWGAN) is an end-to-end speech synthesis vocoder developed by Nagoya University, Japan, featuring efficient and stable waveform generation capabilities. It adopts a generative adversarial network architecture that enables fast and high-fidelity speech reconstruction, suitable for various scenarios such as TTS system backend processing and speech enhancement.</td>
  </tr>
</table>

## III. Quick Integration
Before quick integration, first install the PaddleX wheel package. For wheel installation methods, please refer to [PaddleX Local Installation Tutorial](../../../installation/installation.md). After installing the wheel package, inference for the multilingual speech synthesis acoustic module can be completed with just a few lines of code. You can freely switch models within this module, or integrate model inference from the multilingual speech synthesis module into your project.
Before running the following code, please download the [sample npy](https://paddlespeech.bj.bcebos.com/demos/paddlex/mel.npy){target="_blank"} to your local machine.

```python
from paddlex import create_model
model = create_model(model_name="pwgan_csmsc")
output = model.predict(input='./mel.npy'. , batch_size=1)
for res in output:
    res.print()
    res.save_to_json(save_path="./output/res.json")
```
After running, the results are
```bash
{'result': array([-9.085755e-04, ...,  8.858787e-05], dtype=float32)}
```
The meanings of the running result parameters are as follows:
- `result`: Output wav audio data, of type `numpy.ndarray`。

Explanations of related methods and parameters are as follows:
* `create_model`speech synthesis vocoder (using `pwgan_csmsc` as an example), details are as follows:
<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Parameter</th>
<th>Parameter Description</th>
<th>Type</th>
<th>Options</th>
<th>Default Value</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tr>
<td><code>model_name</code></td>
<td>The name of the model</td>
<td><code>str</code></td>
<td><code>pwgan_csmsc</code></td>
<td><code>None</code></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><code>model_dir</code></td>
<td>The storage path of the model</td>
<td><code>str</code></td>
<td>None</td>
<td>None</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><code>device</code></td>
<td>Model inference device</td>
<td><code>str</code></td>
<td>Supports specifying specific GPU card numbers (e.g. "gpu:0"), other hardware card numbers (e.g. "npu:0"), or CPU (e.g. "cpu")</td>
<td><code>gpu:0</code></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><code>use_hpip</code></td>
<td>Whether to enable high-performance inference plugin. Currently not supported.</td>
<td><code>bool</code></td>
<td>None</td>
<td><code>False</code></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><code>hpi_config</code></td>
<td>High-performance inference configuration. Currently not supported.</td>
<td><code>dict</code> | <code>None</code></td>
<td>None</td>
<td><code>None</code></td>
</tr>
</table>

* Among these, `model_name` must be specified. After specifying `model_name`, PaddleX's built-in model parameters are used by default. When `model_dir` is specified, the user-defined model is used.
* Call the multilingual speech synthesis model's `predict()` method for inference prediction. The `predict()` method parameters include `input` and `batch_size`, with details as follows:

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Parameter</th>
<th>Parameter Description</th>
<th>Type</th>
<th>Options</th>
<th>Default</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tr>
<td><code>input</code></td>
<td>Data to be predicted<</td>
<td><code>str</code></td>
<td>
  Input mel spectrogram, can be npy file path or tensor type.
</td>
<td>None</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><code>batch_size</code></td>
<td>Batch size</td>
<td><code>int</code></td>
<td>Currently only 1 is supported</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
</table>

* Process the prediction results. The prediction result for each sample is a corresponding Result object, which supports saving as `json` files:

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Method</th>
<th>Method Description</th>
<th>Parameter</th>
<th>Type</th>
<th>Parameter Description</th>
<th>Default</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tr>
<td rowspan = "3"><code>print()</code></td>
<td rowspan = "3">Print results to terminal</td>
<td><code>format_json</code></td>
<td><code>bool</code></td>
<td>Whether to format the output content with <code>JSON</code> indentation</td>
<td><code>True</code></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><code>indent</code></td>
<td><code>int</code></td>
<td>Specifies the indentation level to beautify output <code>JSON</code> data for better readability. Only effective when <code>format_json</code> is <code>True</code></td>
<td>4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><code>ensure_ascii</code></td>
<td><code>bool</code></td>
<td>Controls whether to escape non-<code>ASCII</code> characters to Unicode. When set to <code>True</code>, all non-ASCII characters will be escaped; <code>False</code> preserves original characters. Only effective when <code>format_json</code> is <code>True</code></td>
<td><code>False</code></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan = "3"><code>save_to_json()</code></td>
<td rowspan = "3">Save results as json file</td>
<td><code>save_path</code></td>
<td><code>str</code></td>
<td>File save path. When it is a directory, the file name follows the input file type naming convention</td>
<td>None</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><code>indent</code></td>
<td><code>int</code></td>
<td>Specifies the indentation level to beautify output <code>JSON</code> data for better readability. Only effective when <code>format_json</code> is <code>True</code>/td>
<td>4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><code>ensure_ascii</code></td>
<td><code>bool</code></td>
<td>Controls whether to escape non-<code>ASCII</code> characters to Unicode. When set to <code>True</code>, all non-<code>ASCII</code> characters will be escaped; <code>False</code> preserves original characters. Only effective when <code>format_json</code> is <code>True</code></td>
<td><code>False</code></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan = "1"><code>save_to_audio()</code></td>
<td rowspan = "1">Save results as wav format file</td>
<td><code>save_path</code></td>
<td><code>str</code></td>
<td>File save path. When it is a directory, the file name follows the input file type naming convention</td>
<td>None</td>
</table>

* Additionally, the prediction results can also be obtained through attributes:

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Attribute</th>
<th>Attribute Description</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tr>
<td rowspan = "1"><code>json</code></td>
<td rowspan = "1">Get prediction results in <code>json</code> format</td>
</tr>

</table>

For more information on using PaddleX's single-model inference APIs, please refer to the [PaddleX Single-Model Python Script Usage Instructions](../../instructions/model_python_API.en.md).
